$Id: FAQ,v 1.3 2002/02/22 21:03:09 jfine Exp $
This is the TeX daemon and Instant Preview FAQ, version 0.3

If you don't find the answer to your question here, try looking in the
README and INSTALL files.

We suggest that you review this FAQ, the README and the INSTALL files
before installing or using TeXpad.  A look at the shell script
"texpad" wouldn't hurt either.

Questions and comments concerning this document should be sent to
    mailto:jfine@activetex.org
or join the texd mailing list (see question 10).


QUESTIONS
=========

0)  What's happened to Instant Preview?  What's TeXpad?

1)  Why do I get a blank preview screen?

2)  Sometimes preview is not instant.  Why not?

3)  How do I magnify the preview of my document?

4)  How do I use my own LaTeX style file with Instant Preview?

5)  Why are sections, theorems, ... misnumbered?

6)  Sometimes the Preview doesn't update after a change.  Why?

7)  Sometimes Emacs freezes.  What should I do?

8)  What is Active TeX?

9)  What are your development plans?

10) Is there a mailing list?


ANSWERS
=======

0)  What's happened to Instant Preview?  What's TeXpad?

Some would-be users of Instant Preview found that they couldn't get it
working on their system.  So we've broken installation into stages.
First, get the TeX daemon up and running.

Meanwhile, my understanding as to how to use the TeX daemon in
interactive applications has moved on somewhat.  So I'm taking this as
an opportunity to rework the code (and fix some faults in the Emacs
macros).

Instead, we've bundled TeXpad in with the distribution.  It's rather
like the usual command line interface to TeX, except that the material
is typeset, and displayed by xdvi.  

If you really want Instant Preview, download v0.2 of the TeX daemon,
and make appropriate revisions to the scripts there.  When you're
done, please send the scripts back to me.

Most of the other FAQ questions relate to Instant Preview, and I've
left them in this issue of the FAQ.


1)  Why do I get a blank preview screen?

Instant Preview uses xdvi as its previewer.  When Instant Preview
starts up, it needs a dvi file.  We give it one that contains a single
empty page.  This is why you get the blank preview screen.

When you change the contents of any Emacs buffer for which pv-mode is
enabled, the contents of that buffer will be typeset by TeX, and
displayed in the preview screen.  So just insert a space, and delete
it, to refresh the preview screen.

Sometimes xdvi will die.  In this case, we restart xdvi, giving it a
blank preview screen.  (It seems that xdvi dies because it doesn't
like have the dvi file changed while it is reading it.  Instant
Preview places new requirements on its components.)


2)  Sometimes preview is not instant.  Why not?

If the bitmap form of the fonts used by your document do not already
exist, the TeX installation will generate them.  This can take a few
seconds.  Most likely, you will experience this the first time you use
Instant Preview, and sometime when you do something new.

By the way, the fonts used in Display LaTeX (the default style for
Instant Preview) are Hermann Zapf's Euler math fonts, and the Concrete
Roman text font designed by Don Knuth to accompany them.  These fonts
were designed to be legible in difficult conditions, as well as to be
beautiful.  We think they work well as screen fonts.


3)  How do I magnify the preview of my document?

Instant Preview uses the xdvi program already installed on your
computer.  You can use it in the normal way.  Give xdvi the focus, and
use the mouse to magnify portions of the preview image.  By default,
Instant Preview starts xdvi in what is known as expert mode.  Type "x"
to toggle expert mode on and off.

However, remember that xdvi and Emacs are two applications, and
whichever has the focus gets the keystrokes.  Forgetting this can be
the cause of much beeping.

By the way, you can type "q" to exit xdvi.  You might want to do this
to free us some screen real estate.  Instant Preview will, if it needs
to, restart xdvi.  If you "q" xdvi before exiting Emacs, then Emacs
will not warn that xdvi exists as an active processes.


4)  How do I use my own LaTeX style file with Instant Preview?

They should work straight off.  But if you change the preamble, you
will need to exit and re-enter pv-mode.  This forces a new instance
of the TeX daemon to be created.


5)  Why are sections, theorems, ... misnumbered?

LaTeX is getting confused.  It's been designed to deal with the whole
document from beginning to end, in the correct order, and with each
part processed exactly once.  Instant Preview sends multiple variants
of the document to LaTeX, one for each keystroke.  So it gets
completely the wrong idea as to how many sections and so forth there
are in the document.

The solution is to set all counters and so forth to the correct values
at the start of each document, or more exactly at the start of any
document fragment that you would like to preview.  The \Belay command
provides a hook for doing this.

By the way, if you are editing two files at the same time, you can
make pv-mode active in both.  The preview window will then show the
most recently changed file.


6)  Sometimes the Preview doesn't update after a change.  Why?

Instant Preview relies on regular expressions to determine what part
of the document it should preview.  If the search fails, instead you
get a message
    Unable to preview chunk
in the minibuffer.

Due to lack of time (and expertise) the regular expressions used are
not quite good enough, particularly at the ends of the document.

If you have the time and skills, please help out.  This is an
important area of development for Instant Preview, and your help would
be much appreciated.


7)  Sometimes Emacs freezes.  What should I do?

If your are using Instant Preview, and the corresponding TeX daemon
either freezes or dies, Emacs will freeze.  More exactly, it is 
writing to a pipe, and that write is blocked.

The solution is to unfreeze or restart the TeX daemon.  Another method
is to copy the pipe to say /dev/null, thereby emptying it.

There are quite a few things that could be done to make the TeX daemon
more robust.


8)  What is Active TeX?

TeX's usual backslash-and-braces input syntax arises from its use of
category codes.  It causes all manner of problems, both for users and
for programmers.  This is particularly true for verbatim and other
special processing of content.  

Active TeX solves category code problems once and for all, by making
all characters active all of the time.  It also allows the macro
programmer to enforce and input syntax, and to report input errors to
the user, before the get to TeX's internal mechanisms.  No more TeX
error messages.

Instant Preview is semi-wysiwyg TeX.  To go the whole way, and allow
the user to edit the document by interacting with the dvi file, the
dvi file must be made richer in content.  Specials are the way to do
this.  Active TeX was designed to allow this sort of thing to be done.

Active TeX also supports an enhanced programming environment.


9)  What are your development plans?

Instant Preview is a combination of TeX the program, LaTeX (or some
other macro package), Emacs, xdvi and finally the TeX daemon.

In the short term, the goal is to improve the TeX daemon.  There's
lots of little (and not so little) things that could be done.  Porting
to Windows and Macintosh are examples.

In the medium term, the goal is to improve the interaction with the
other components (LaTeX, Emacs and xdvi) of Instant Preview.

In the longer term, the goal is to support a variety of non-TeX input
formats, and to provide rich interaction with the previewed dvi file.

Wherever possible, I'd like to cooperate with existing projects, such
as dvilib, Lyx and TeXmacs.  The TeX daemon can be part of any project
that requires quality real-time text formatting.


10) Is there a mailing list?

YES.  Thanks to the TeX Users Group (http://www.tug.org) for hosting
the texd mailing list.

To view the mailing list archives
    http://tug.org/pipermail/texd

To join the mailing list
    http://tug.org/mailman/listinfo/texd


% FAQ ends here
